I made it out to Cancun and Tulum (a couple hours south) a few weeks ago. Tulum was more interesting than Cancun because the more traditional communities in the area were getting smashed together with Cauncun-ification spreading down the coastline. Cancun itself felt more like the vacation destination equivalent of a past-its-prime suburb in New Jersey that priced out all the young people and lost its reason for existing (cheaper than going to the beach in Florida). The main option for getting to Tulum involved taking a regular coach bus from the Cancun airport, which was probably a good indicator that the place was still under development.

In Postwar by Tony Judt, the author mentions that Western European tourism to the Balkans in the 1970’s was strongly redistributive. This argument is easy to understand, since you have tourists from wealthy countries expecting (and willing to pay for) higher lodging and food standards, so you get a consistent French or German level of spending in a country that ordinarily has living standard of a third or less than those places. Nevertheless, despite the knowledge that Cancun’s commercialization is almost certainly good for the local workers and economy, I still get a feeling of uneasiness doing these sorts of trips. But i’ve found a good way to think about this is its actually your duty as a wealthy tourist to just go all out and be the loose-pocketed American. I think that most people, providing they are indeed reaping the financial benefits, will not resent you for simply showing up at a resort and spending money.

I spent a day with a local tour guide that spoke 5 languages (!) and had recently made the pivot from primarily conducting tours in French to doing them in English. (Maybe in ten years he’ll learn Mandarin). We were talking about the history of the area (possibly the most intimidating list of economic exploitation and violence you will ever hear of), but he ended everything by shrugging and noting that this was just a part of their history. If the same Westerners that arrived in the past with swords and guns now come with investments and beach towels, he’s happy to take their money. At the same time, people admire Western standards of living and institutions, not their values. I think another set of values would suit people in the area just fine if the standards of living were comparable.

The local government seemed very invested in making Tulum a tourist destination on par with Cancun. The hotel (it was new but not an all-inclusive resort) I stayed at was the only obviously open hotel I saw on the entire new hotel strip (there were a few resorts facing the beach that *****could***** have been open but didn’t look obviously so). This was against a dozen resorts that looked to be almost complete and a huge area of jungle that was obviously being torn down in favor of tourist facilities. I haven’t seen this rate of planned construction investment since I was visiting Shenzhen as a kid. The number of locals who were obviously employed in construction of these massive resorts in one way or another outnumbered the number of tourists I saw by at least 10 to 1.

Will all this investment pay off? I’d never underestimate the spending capacity of Americans tourists, plus Cancun is not cheap at all as a way to get the standard “resort on the beach” experience. I’m guessing many tourists, especially younger families, would appreciate a slightly lower-priced and out of the way option. But at the same time, it was a lot of trees to be cutting down and a lot of coastline to be fouling with construction and hotel debris. Is it really a good idea to suffer the costs of environmental degradation in exchange for training thousands of workers to work in the hotel services industry, an industry where competitive advantage is primarily based on price? Wouldn’t it be better to invest in a manufacturing base to handle all the manufacturing that will inevitably be relocated away from China and try to climb the value ladder that way?

I did see some evidence of local manufacturing investment, even in a part of Mexico that’s not really well known for that sort of thing. E.G. the contract electronics manufacturers, many places that ostensibly offer iPhone fixing services but seem to have too much shop space to just perform this service, a highway system that was pretty advanced and functional, and a workforce that appeared to be able to move to wherever the jobs were available. Generally I am more cautious when leaving major cities in developing countries, but Tulum felt very safe to me, which I suppose makes me pretty bullish on the Yucatán peninsula more broadly.

I didn’t enjoy Mayan food when compared to Northern Mexican food or even the food in Mexico City. If forced to choose, I would recommend the Fish Veracruz or any other local fish (don’t get the salmon).  I also liked the wide variety of pickles (potato pickles!) that were available. The pork dishes were pretty dry and unappealing. In general I think I actually prefer the main dishes in American-Mexican food (burritos, enchiladas, etc). Just like how ramen is my least favorite Japanese noodle dish, tacos are my least favorite way of consuming Mexican braised meats.

The natural landscape, on the other hand, is spectacular. You can feel the density of organic life as soon as you step out of the air conditioned buildings. There’s maybe a little too much organic life, as my bite-ridden legs could attest. As someone who is more used to the more dry and sterile (but still beautiful) natural sights of the American West, walking through the rain forested biomes in Southern Mexico was definitely worth the price of admission. 

The taxis in the area seem to be governed by some kind of monopoly or government cabal. Taxi drivers have a sheet of minimum prices they are allowed to charge tourists (locals will never take these taxis). Sometimes they will try to charge you a higher price and pocket the difference, but they will never go below the marked minimums. When you have to spend 5 minutes negotiating with a taxi driver and then switch cars, only to pay 15 bucks to go a mile, you really appreciate Uber more. In general I think what Uber accomplished was underrated. It’s obviously the poster child of stupid tech companies enabled by dumb VC money and the secular wave of the cloud/mobile paradigm, but I think its actually the most significant company too. The experience of traveling in places without Uber is so much worse. In the US all the taxi companies have their own ordering apps now, but I highly doubt that would have happened without the additional competition.