I was in the Bay Area this past week for some work events. Paradoxically, ever since both the mood and reality of the tech industry took a turn downwards, I have been seeing more “SF is back” buzz online. It did seem to me like there was more going on than there was when I was in the area in August 2021. This might be due to the release of ChatGPT (I stayed in Hayes Valley!), but to me seemed driven more through the needle shifting more towards in-person work due to companies looking to downsize without actually downsizing, and potentially also laid off employees starting new in-person companies.

RE: remote work, it seems like the status of remote work in the next decade depends on the fortunes of companies that either happened to scale their revenue/headcount a lot during the covid era, or were subsequently founded as remote-friendly during the same period. These are the companies most committed to remote work, and the companies that investors will look at when trying to justify in-person vs remote. If many/most of these companies flop, I could see general sentiment swinging heavily against remote work for software companies. So if you are a pro remote work software engineer, you had better hope that e.g. the Stripe situation turns out well for investors and employees.

The thing that stuck with me the most was not anything that happened while I was actually in the Bay Area. I took a Boeing 737-800 from the east coast to SF, which is obviously like the most common plane for domestic flights within the US. These things are reliable, they are everywhere, and they are AFAIK the only plane that Southwest owns.

The 737-800 was designed in 1994, and based mostly off the 1967 737-100. The average age of a 737 in service is ~20 years. This is to say that they are not very new or exciting. No one ever thinks, “I’m so excited I get to fly on a 737.” They have a modest amount of leg room (thanks United) and occasionally have outlets and working WiFi.

My flight back from SF was overbooked, so United upgraded us to a 787 Dreamliner. This was actually the first time I’ve ever taken a Dreamliner. Growing up in Seattle, most of the discussion around Dreamliners was around the production problems, the issues with regulators, and in hindsight sort of being the canary in the coal mine w.r.t the decline of Boeing as an aerospace giant.

When the plane was announced, there was a ton of hype around it. It was billed as a triumph of globalization, Boeing called it the future of flight,  and promised material progress of the experience of travel that we have not seen since the Concord. Since consumers clearly prefer lower prices at the expense of good service, the only way for the average airline passenger experience to get better is through a better plane.

The Dreamliner never seemed to get off the round. Up until last month, I had never flown on one. I even mistakenly believed that production for the plane had been cancelled. Nevertheless, I did end up getting on one for my return flight and it was an eye-opening experience.

It’s sort of difficult for me to totally describe all the things that were better on this plane compared to a 737. Obviously it’s a dual row plane, so it seats ~250 people as opposed to ~150-200 on a normal 737, but it somehow *feels* bigger than that. The lighting systems are significantly superior to what gets used on older planes. The lights are somehow both more comfortable when trying to stay awake and when trying to sleep. The air filtration system seems to be significantly improved, tracking the general improvements in HVAC in buildings over the past few decades.

Admittedly n=1, but the flight was also subjectively a lot smoother to me. I wouldn’t even have noticed that we were coming in for a landing unless the pilot had told us. I hate flying. I have hated flying ever since I graduated high school, but this plane ride reminded me of the joy of flying as a kid (what are all of these buttons? what are all of these cool lights? is this a spaceship?)

It’s fun to know that material progress is actually possible and that the state of things being not as good as they could be is in fact a choice, and not one that we should accept.