I never considered myself a Anglophile before this past year, but I’ve been slowly converted by my fiancee, who is a fan of British television, tea, culture, and also lived in the UK briefly. I spent several weeks this year on a WW2 history binge, specifically focusing on the European perspective which obviously frequently features the UK.  Plus many great books and movies set in England which I will hopefully include in my year-end post.  Some people might make fun of the UK for only being good at the sounding-smart industries, but they really do a great job of sounding smart.

I was in London for a few days this year (my third time there) and got the chance to explore some more English countryside. I’ve read about reverse Paris-syndrome where Japanese tourists go to the British countryside with low expectations and fall in love with the quaint towns and cheeky people, and I have to say I caught some of this disease myself. You can make fun of how the British prioritize keeping their greenbelts unbuilt at the cost of unaffordable housing costs inside them, but the landscape an hour outside of London is genuinely beautiful. The food is actually great when well made (I’m not sure I’m ready for this conversation but I think I actually prefer it to French or Italian food), and the people are wonderful, friendly, always ready to banter, and blessed with the gift of great humor even in challenging situations.

This trip made me realize that London, which is wonderful, is more accurately described as a ***********product*********** of the British (and the British Empire) rather than being British itself. The city and its surroundings should probably better be understood as a city-state within a larger country.

While in town, I got a haircut at an Irish barbershop from a very Sicilian man straight out of the Godfather. I generally like to describe Europe as more socially conservative than the US and the survival of basically single-gender places is one example (there is never any explicit prohibition on mixing, but the general idea is obvious). Afternoon tea is another example of this. (my fiancee went with her school friends and I was not invited to attend girls time)

I sometimes think of the whole Western+ world as downstream of San Francisco, with some places being a few years behind the trends there (New York City), and some places a few years behind the trends and with different preferences for tradeoffs between stability and dynamism (Germany). But recently I’ve started to wonder if it’s more accurate to say that the entire Western+ world is downstream of some combination of San Francisco and London. Whenever I read work by British thinkers it feels like they have a pretty advanced grasp of culture in the US. (Maybe this is why British media is so popular here). British intellectuals sometimes feel even more “online” than American ones.

This trip made me love commuter/regional rail even more than I already do. Sometimes the distinctions between commuter rail and intercity rail or lightrail/subways can be a little bit hard to define, but I would define regional rail as mostly or entirely above ground (as compared to subways), and requiring a ticket/destination as opposed to the subway where you can just get on. Compared to intercity, regional rail is just intercity rail that stays within a metro area. In London, this metro area is huge and growing, despite the greenbelt laws. There are non-zero daily commuters to London from places at least as far as Oxford and Bicester.

Regional rail is awesome for a couple reasons. First, it pretty much always travels faster than any cars it is running next to, which is psychologically important. Second, the seats are way more comfortable and they are generally built for most people to be sitting rather than standing. Finally, they just get you way further out from the city more quickly both due to the faster max speed and because the stops are less frequent. This is more noticeable in England since you hit the greenbelt and end up in countryside pretty quickly compared to sprawly suburbs in the US, but I have noticed this riding, e.g. the LA regional rail or LIRR as well.

The awesomeness of regional rail makes me question my home city of Seattle’s transit choices. Its strategy of adding light rail tracks until the system approximately serves all the medium sized towns in the metro area seems pretty poor to me. As as example, the first three major lines of light rail in Seattle involved transit from outlying areas to downtown. First, downtown to the airport (south of the city). Second, downtown to the Eastside (well developed suburbs), and finally from the northern suburbs into the city.

To take the new lightrail expansion from Lynwood (a suburb north of Seattle) to downtown, will take half an hour, which is about the same time the journey took by bus. This same bus/train calculation applies to all three of the new lines to downtown, to say nothing of comparing light-rail travel time to driving. 

Meanwhile the actual downtown core, where I would really prefer taking a subway instead of a bus (more reliable transfers, more frequent arrivals), is not really served by rail transit, with very obvious trips between high density areas a few miles away like Lower Queen Anne to Capitol Hill or Ballard to U District not supported.

Essentially, the long bus routes in Seattle are serving as regional rail replacements and are doing a adequate job of it (it seems like most regional rail infrastructure runs on legacy track and Seattle has very little of that), but instead of treating subways and regional rail (buses) as complementary, the city is trying to use subways to replace regional rail (the bus networks), which is bad across all dimensions. The subways do not serve the trips you would expect a subway to serve and are too slow to serve the trips you would expect regional rail to serve.

Wishing everyone a Merry Christmas and Happy New Year!