I’ve been to the Netherlands twice in my life. The first time I went was in summer 2018, and I only went to Amsterdam. This past trip was in November, and I went to most of Southern Holland (Amsterdam, the Hague, Rotterdam, Utrecht).

The first impression you get from reading European history is that people living in what is now the Netherlands are pretty fortunate. The area escaped the worst excesses of Europe’s revolutions (the Thirty Years War, the Napoleonic Wars, the revolutions of 1848, both world wars) while also heavily participating in the boom years. There are a shocking number of Dutch individuals and organizations that have achieved global significance and in general this small country always seems to punch well above its weight.

Normally when you get to the exurbs of big European cities, you come across buildings that are pretty dire-looking. In the US this pattern is normally reversed, where you have shockingly busted-up buildings in the cities and in extremely rural areas. But in general, even the richest first worlds countries seem to always have some parts that are dumps. In my trip around the Netherlands this November, I didn’t really notice anywhere that could be described as a dump. Pretty much everything was late 20th century Euro-core or modern looking. Even for a relatively small country (the population of the Netherlands is higher than you might think) this is one of the more impressive feats I have seen out of a western country.

It’s likely just my PTSD from being in American cities for too long, but central Amsterdam (which at least among the Dutch has a bad reputation, given the marijuana and the prostitution), felt very safe at night and was as clean as I would expect a nicer suburb in the US to be. From what we heard, there’s been gradual pressure by the Dutch government to discourage tourism to the city solely based on its poor reputation, and comparing this trip to my trip in 2018, it seems like whatever policies the city has enacted have worked. I only smelled marijuana smoke once or twice, and saw far fewer drunk/raucous people on the streets on Friday night (admittedly this was in November instead of July). There were no buildings that were clearly in need of repair and very few (if any) homeless.

I understand now why the urbanism crowd puts Dutch cities on a pedestal. They genuinely do prioritize those taking transit and (especially) those who are biking above cars. 90% of the time when going from point A to B in the central city, taking transit or riding a bike will be faster than taking a car. Once you get used to crossing a bike lane, then a street, then another bike lane, it’s very easy for pedestrians as well. The transit is very clean and safe, and also just as importantly usually arrives on time and at frequent intervals. And this is all in a city of a few hundred thousand.(though admittedly with higher population density than most American cities)

Southwest Holland (between Rotterdam and the Hague) is the most solar-punk place I have ever seen. I visited industry showroom for the Dutch agricultural industry that focused on the tools and infrastructure behind Dutch tomato growing. The Netherlands frequently exports the second highest value of agricultural goods (mostly to other EU countries), mostly vegetables (tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers) and flowers.

There was a brief period in my life where I was interested in the hype around vertical farming in the US. It all sounds really great in a crunchy hippie sort of way, grow all your vegetables in a building in the city and throw some solar panels on top while you’re at it. Boom, your city is self-sustaining! Of course that whole industry is basically a scam, and basically only succeeded in producing tiny 16 dollar cases of lettuce at Whole Foods.

The Dutch system definitely does not fulfill the crunchy urban fantasy of vertical farming (the farming ***is*** done indoors, but in ~acre size greenhouses that are low and wide rather than tall), but definitely fulfills the economic feasibility part. It turns out that ignoring the free energy coming from the sky in favor of artificial lights is a dumb idea. The key principles of the greenhouses are being able to control temperature more directly (they do use some heating to keep the inside of the greenhouses at a optimal temperature if there is not enough sun), optimizing watering by controlling where a plant grows, and being able to control pests a lot better by doing things like releasing predators. It seems like there is new technology being deployed to do things like measure a plant’s stress levels with electric voltage, but I’m pretty dubious of that kind of thing.

Alongside the greenhouses, there are in fact wind turbine installations which are a nice reflection the history of the region, but they are just regular wind turbines that are deployed by the dozen on the ground, not on top of the greenhouses, because even in the tiny Netherlands, space is not at that much of a premium.

I didn’t get a chance to do the tour of the port of Rotterdam, but I did get a brief look while driving by and it is also an impressive technological feat. As someone who still thinks of robots as toys or one-off college projects, the mass deployment of automated machines feels impressively sci-fi. It seems like this is one area where the US’s protectionism (the Jones Act or too-powerful unions.) really hurts and prevents us from having nice things.

I really appreciate the Dutch people for successfully combining Anglo humor and German efficiency. The country is German in the sense of having great engineering culture and also not requiring you to sign a billion waivers to do anything (doesn’t have the annoying Anglo legal culture), but British in the sense of having a sense of humor. For an inexperienced European traveler from the US, this is probably the first country I would recommend a visit to after the UK.