At some point in your late 20’s you start getting invited to multiple weddings a year. So far I’m still in the happy zone where it can be fun to get dressed up in a suit (the need to dress up feels increasingly silly, especially after a few too many lat raises suddenly necessitates spending another 500 dollars on something to be worn twice before another visit to Suit Supply) and see old friends. So far no kids in attendance but I am sure that will be changing.

I had to attend two such weddings in the past 3 months, and both necessitated that I fly back to Seattle. I grew up in the Eastside, which is the sprawl of bedroom communities across Lake Washington from Seattle when I grew up. On the surface, the area is normal enough that I can say I grew up in a normal suburb with a straight face (This was especially true in the 90s and 00’s). On the other hand Microsoft was (and still is) headquartered in the area and the presence of a massive number of people employed in the software industry was clear even at the time.

Aside from the predictable surge of immigrants looking to capitalize on the plentiful opportunities for jobs (and the accompanying ethnic restaurants and grocery stores), the most notable change I’ve noticed is the building spree developers have been on in the area. Sometimes local laws, interest rates, and the right local builders mix together into a perfect storm, and construction went absolutely crazy in the 2010’s in the Eastside. The rate of new construction was significantly higher than what I’ve observed in e.g. SOMA in San Francisco or Northern Virginia post-Amazon HQ2. In terms of form, I would say on average the apartments look no better or worse than the new construction you see in every other city in the US.

Despite all this new apartment construction, my local school district is considering closing the (newly renovated) middle school that I attended due to a lack of demand. In some ways, this is entirely predictable, as Bellevue checks so many of the boxes of the classic upscale West Coast suburb. People move in for relatively affordable housing and relatively good job opportunities to raise families, supply can’t keep up with demand (no room to sprawl), and the children raised in the area can’t afford to have their own families. At this point the children move to Phoenix, Austin, or Raleigh, while the well-off boomers age in place and complain about the high price of living (no service workers!) and school districts close schools.

I wonder if this boom-bust cycle is just a natural feature of American suburbs. A generation of people grew up in Midwestern suburbs, then their children moved to the West Coast, and then their children to the South. It almost seems too easy to predict a rise in housing prices near e.g. Chicago, as younger millennials priced out of coastal cities look for the next best option and boomers vacate their old homes. This process may be pretty hard to prevent simply due to ebbs and flows of demographics, but it seems like the local government in Bellevue in intent on breaking out of this cycle.

The surge in apartment building is an obvious signal of this push. The city has a lot more resources than the average bedroom community. From a financial perspective, I’m pretty sure the strategy has succeeded. The mass redevelopment has definitely succeeded in cultivating a new tax base of single 20 and 30 something software workers. There’s a Indian dosa place that was opened about 15 minutes from my house. In my time it was located in a classic American suburban strip mall (single story, big parking lot). Now it has thousands of apartment units within a five minute walk. Heroically, this place has managed to stay open through all that construction and is now almost certainly printing money due to all the demand + food delivery.

But if the goal is to keep families in the area, the closure of public schools obviously shows that current policy is not working In general it seems like mass apartment living for families will never happen here. Revealed preferences show that people would rather move to a less desirable metro area than do this.

I do see more families living in the skinny-tall townhouses that you also see built everywhere, so it appears that the developers may be onto something with that form factor. Shared walls are acceptable for younger Americans where shared floors and ceiling are not. I think the far superior soundproofing that modern technology enables plays a big part in this. Living in a side-by-side townhouse today probably feels more similar to living in a single family home with insulation technology from the 80’s.

The traffic is way worse than I remember. Not so much on the highways, which seem to get used relatively less frequently because this metro area has a remote-work incidence way way above average, but more on the local arterials. When I went out to dinner at 7:30 the streets used to basically empty. These days it looks like M street in Washington DC. There are some half-hearted attempts to bring light rail to the area, but the main line opening ~~2022~~ ~~2023~~ ~~2024~~ ~~2025~~ ~~2026~~ only connects the Eastside with Seattle, and I’m not convinced that will replace that many trips outside of commuting which was already done via bus.

As a believe in Vespa-supremacy, I think we should look into encouraging more alternative forms of transportation that are not mass transit or personal automobile. I don’t think it’s possible for mass transit to ever get to the level of efficiency a personal car provides for daily trips (e.g. for groceries), or even to get very close at all, but trying to turn two car households into single car (and electric scooter) households seems like a worthwhile gamble.