I have not yet succumbed to the particular urge (drop everything and move to New York City) that afflicts any American under the age of 30. It was a close miss, and the story of why two months in Brooklyn did not have me joining the flood of software engineers working remotely in NYC is a exciting one)

Regardless, some notes from many trips to the city.

For someone used to the transients who inhabit cities on the West Coast, I find that the homeless people in New York have a surprising amount of charisma ([精](https://chinese.yabla.com/chinese-english-pinyin-dictionary.php?define=%E7%B2%BE)[神](https://chinese.yabla.com/chinese-english-pinyin-dictionary.php?define=%E7%A5%9E)). On my last trip, a man on the subway who was trying to exploit my experience with database systems pitched me his face mask business (decorative, not medical). He was planning on doing millions of sales in the future and needed somewhere to track everything. I suggested Microsoft Excel as a solution and  was pretty happy with the advice (email me if you are interested in my services!).

New York City (along with Boston, and many other Northeastern cities) is OLD.  You could scoff at this and point to the hundreds of cities in the Middle East, in China, or in Europe that predate it. But there are very few cities that combine the ambition of New York with its age. There are tier 2 cities in China that are more impressive and comfortable than Manhattan, but that have mostly been constructed in the last few decades. Then there are plenty of older cities in Europe that are outdoor museums for tourists (while locals live in the suburbs), plus cities that are a combination of the two. Meanwhile NYC is eternal, trash bags on the side of the road and window mounted air conditioning combined with the occasional high-rise that would not be out of place in developed East Asia at all.

New Yorkers love their inconveniences. Garbage bags on the streets, a rat coming out of the bags, more rats coming out of the bags. The grocery options are bodegas that have too many things packed into too small of a space or a Whole Foods with too few things packed into too large of a grocery bill. Life in New York is just frustrating enough that you can have a conversation with a taxi driver who is simultaneously pro-America and pro-Taliban, or meet an immigrant who is simultaneously pro-Trump and pro-CCP. In a slightly more comfortable environment, people would rather just keep their mouths shut.

New York always feels like a human capital Ponzi scheme. There can’t possibly be another generation of immigrants from Guangdong to run this barbecue shop that somehow still manages to stay open selling 8 dollar lunch specials. What about the truck ran by that couple from Mexico? Maybe there will be one more generation after them, but then what? Eventually every ethnic enclave trends towards Little Italy, and the pockets of the weird and the tax-dodgers will eventually disappear. But for now I’m wrong, because somehow these places continue to chug along.

As I’ve gotten older, my favorite part of the city has migrated further and further downtown. At first it was Midtown, then Union Square and Williamsburg, then East Village, then Soho, until I’ve reached the point where I spend most of my time in Chinatown, the Financial District, or downtown Brooklyn.

There are just a couple rules for the optimal strategy for eating out in New York (for Americans). The first rule is to have Chinese food if it is possible to do so. The second rule is to buy breakfast and lunch from somewhere with a minimal amount of seating (a food truck, a deli). In general, avoid Thai and Italian food, especially if it costs more than 20 dollars (this is generally a good rule anyways). If you need to go out somewhere nice for dinner, find a Korean restaurant or a steakhouse.

The best non-luxury hotel in New York is the Refinery Hotel on 38th St (not just because of the free coffee). Failing this, any of the modern pod hotels will do the trick (CitizenM, Moxy), or better yet the sofa of a willing acquaintance. I’ve reached the age where I generally prefer to avoid couch-surfing where possible. In New York, something about the feeling of extended adolescence makes couch-surfing more appealing (or maybe it’s the 300$/night hotels).

There are many “New York” books, so it’s difficult to think of the best one for reading while in town, but I think of “Confessions of a Hedge Fund Trader” as the most aspirational.

(written in March 2023)