# South Korea

I spent a couple weeks this past month in Japan (my third time) and South Korea (my second time, the first on my own).

Generally I don’t really mind North American carriers. The food is slightly worse but they are generally on time and Alaska even comes with extra legroom. That being said, I plan on never flying Air Canada again. The delay on my return flight that left me stranded overnight in Toronto (with a complementary hotel) was the least bad part. Far worse was the connection home after, aka the sketchiest flying experience of my life. I was on a Bombardier that was probably built in the 1970’s, featuring a emergency door that was duct-taped shut and ********probably******** would not have opened up after a bout of moderate turbulence plus engines that seemed to constantly be struggling to keep the plane in the air. Worse than that was the mandate (coming from someone with no day-today experience on the ground I’m sure) that every carry-on going through the check-in line be checked by a couple poor Air Canada employees.

The Youtube algorithm has me pegged as a South Korean culture enjoyer, probably because it’s figured out that I’m a Asian American male in my 20’s. But the flip side of constantly being recommended K-pop dance videos and interviews is getting exposed to way too many videos about South Korea’s fertility rate, war between the genders, and how the country is apparently hell on earth for young people. So everything I say about this topic should probably be taken with a grain of salt.

*But* I found Seoul to be a very pessimistic place, even compared to the famously optimistic Japan. It seemed like every person employed in a job responsible for keeping the trains running on time was at least 50 and pushing 60. Meanwhile there was this whole set of college graduates working in convenience stores and studying for some occupational test or another. You could learn about a country’s age pyramid as an abstract thing in economic demography classes, or you could just go for a walk around the streets of Seoul. Seoul feels like a city in its golden age of cultural viability. Pretty much anything you consume in the city is good. Clothing, food, entertainment, etc. This is awesome as a consumer, but doesn’t really do much to shake the underlying pessimism that I felt, a feeling that one should enjoy things while they still could, that this could not possibly last much longer.

There’s a Paul Graham piece about how every city pushes you to be the most *something (*rich, or powerful, or tasteful), which I generally think is over-exaggerated. I’ve been to Harrisburg, Pennsylvania and I can tell you that city doesn’t tell you to do anything except leave. But this explanation definitely applies to Seoul. Specifically Seoul pushes you to be the most beautiful.

Nowhere has the Instagram-ification of the world gone further than here. But it’s not really the AirSpace aesthetic that is so common in the West either. The cafe’s look beautiful but are genuinely very cozy, the PC Bang’s are an incredible experience, etc. This is South Korea’s response to criticisms that everything is about looking good for social media. Make it look pretty but also make it feel pretty. There are ads for beauty products everywhere here. Ads for plastic surgery clinics, ads for gyms featuring implausibly beautiful shirtless men, makeup stores everywhere. It’s unsurprising that this is the country where some cafes ban children and/or seniors. No ugly people allowed!

The food in Seoul is as good as advertised. The care they apply to designing interior spaces is clearly evident here. This is the kind of place where you can order a Starbucks Americano and its probably one of the best cups of coffee you’ve had in your life. Normally after a few days in Japan, I’m ready to do some R-rated things for some vegetables, but that is not the case in Korea. The street food is pretty hyped up and is quite good, but I actually found that eating in Seoul is similar to eating in Los Angeles. You want to find the restaurants where the middle-aged construction workers eat at, probably a reasonable distance away from where all the young pretty people generally hang out. The higher end food was also quite good, coming from a guy who generally dislikes that kind of thing.

The similarities with LA go further than the food. The public transit in Seoul is better than most American cities (although I am starting to wonder whether I am confusing good transport with transport that merely doesn’t have any incoherent/aggressive drug addicts onboard at most times), but worse than what I expected. There are many times where you need to transfer between buses and trains, or take multiple buses. In contrast to Tokyo, where you would probably have to pay me to own a car, it definitely seems like a benefit here. Also people drive like absolute manics. All the cars mean Seoul’s air quality is also quite poor. Namsan Mountain Park is a literal breath of fresh air, and I would imagine anyone living here would choose to live within walking distance if possible.

Pretty much every Western city i’ve visited since 2021 has been anywhere between slightly to considerably worse than before the pandemic. In some cases, I’ve personally been able to compare the before and afters, in others I’ve received this information secondhand. Some people might attribute this to lockdowns, but there is no way to prove this since no large American city is run by an administration that would have favored more lax COVID policy. Other people might attribute this to the protests in summer 2020, but I found that this fact also persisted in European cities that had no such protests. My current heuristic is that the net negative COVID affect is affected mostly by 1. the number of serious cases/deaths a city experienced, 2. the degree to which the local government simply stopped providing services (as happened in American cities), and 3. the percentage of workers who still work from home.

Cities in Japan (light touch, relatively few covid deaths, general distrust of digital technology), feel roughly the same as they did in 2019. In a world where urban life has seemed to just get worse and worse, a city like Tokyo that stays resolutely the same is worth appreciating. In the US, Covid accelerated the digitalization of everything (for better and for worse), while there were only minor hints of this in Japan. Maybe a few more food delivery couriers, and a few more restaurants with functioning websites. But this is a country that is still analog in its day to day life. The only piece of digital technology to get traction is the vanilla smartphone + internet browsing. (the only piece of digital technology worth using?)

As a software engineer, I find this pretty interesting. Of course you can look at all the GDP statistics that show that Japan is missing out on the productivity gains from software and hasn’t grown in real terms since the 90’s. But GDP per capita is obviously an imperfect indicator. On the ground, Tokyo is a much more pleasant place to live than any western city, and it does this with very little digital technology.

I tend to think that many of the organizations which haven’t heavily incorporated digital technology yet have good reasons for not doing so. If modern digital technology was such a game changer, I really don’t believe that cities in Japan would be able to maintain comparable (higher?) quality of life as compared to American ones. We will know digital technology has had a transformative effect on the world economy when Japan is no longer able to pull the trick of maintaining quality of life with minimal digitization. Current software engineering practices generally focus on getting the next feature out the door without too much optimization and getting feedback on it. While this practice obviously has its benefits, I think it’s good to balance this with trying to design systems that are so good even the Japanese could not do without. You can sub “Japanese” with every tough-to-crack vertical industry that software companies are trying to build for these days.

Since I’ve been to Tokyo before, there wasn’t really that much new there that I find worth sharing. I think the thing with Japan is go there and do the same thing over and over and appreciate the weight that people assign to pretty normal things. I did go to the Shibuya national gymnasium twice to workout and had a good time. Communal baths in the public gym bathroom! What a concept!

Outside of Tokyo there were a few new things that I did. Sometimes you hit your late 20s and all you want from your vacation is to be able to go on a run in a forest full of chirping birds, return to a comfortable resort playing Baroque music, have a complimentary cup of coffee, and soak in the outdoor hot tub with a view of the mountains. If this sounds like your cup of tea then I would definitely recommend two nights at one of the resorts in Hakone. As a guy who likes to go on jet-lag runs early in the morning in new countries, this was one of the best running experiences I’ve ever had.

I had originally wanted to visit the Toyota factory in Nagoya, but learned that industrial tourism requires a bit more planning, as the factory is currently closed to visitors. I will have to do some more planning next time there’s a factory I want to visit. I did get a look at the commemorative museum in the city. It’s certainly worth a visit if you are in the area, and I was actually surprised that I found Nagoya to be more pleasant and a better home base for taking the train around central Japan than Osaka.